time series would lead to better performance. However, the modeling complexity increases with the number of time points being considered. This leads to the difficulty of focusing on the reconstruction of single time points. Fig. 5(a) shows A ( · ) calculated using either M pt or M seq , and ˆ A ( · ) calculated by NPSR using the WADI dataset. Given the fact that point t is predicted anomalous if A ( t ) ≥ θ a , we can see that M seq has a higher false positive rate due to the spikes. In comparison, M pt more accurately detects anomalies in a point-wise fashion. This highlights the superiority of M pt over M seq for this dataset. Furthermore, the induced anomaly score calculated by NPSR has very low false positive rates, and can sometimes even learn to identify anomalies that are not detected by M pt or M seq (Fig. 5(b), the anomaly subsequence at t = 15200 and the subsequence to its left, pointed by the black arrows). This suggests that ˆ A ( · ) is superior to the original A ( · ) for this dataset. However, M pt might not always perform superior to M seq . False negatives can be visualized between t = 14800 and t = 14900 , where M pt struggles to recognize the anomaly but M seq effectively detects anomalous time-dependent relationships. This suggests that the anomaly segment contains relatively more contextual than point anomalies. Since the reconstruction error of M pt is used as A ( · ) , we lose the advantage of effectively utilizing the reconstruction error of M seq . This results in ˆ A ( · ) not high enough to reach θ a within this segment. An important future direction would be to explore how to appropriately select A ( · ) among multiple models (cf. Appendix F).

Figure 5: (a) Anomaly scores using M pt , M seq and NPSR (soft gate function, θ N = 99 . 85% N trn , and d = 16 ), and the true labels of the WADI dataset. (b) Magnification for t ∈ { 14500 , ..., 15600 } .

<!-- image -->