Our intuition comes from the observation that state-of-the-art methods using sequence-based reconstruction models encounter the point-contextual detection trade-off, resulting in noisy reconstruction results and suboptimal performance. As an alternative, we start by experimenting with point-based reconstruction methods, which exhibit a lower variance as they do not require the modeling of timedependent relationships. Despite the absence of temporal information, we find that the corresponding anomaly score for a point-based reconstruction model can already yield a competitive performance. To further bridge the gap between point-based and sequence-based models, we introduce a nominality score that can be calculated from their outputs and derive an induced anomaly score based on the nominality score and the original anomaly score. We find that the induced anomaly score can be superior to the original anomaly score. To provide theoretical proof of our findings, we frame the reconstruction process as a means to fix the anomalies and identify underlying nominal time points and prove that the induced anomaly score can always perform better or just as well as the original anomaly score under certain conditions. We also conduct experiments on several single and multi-entity datasets and demonstrate that our proposed method surpasses the performance of recent state-of-the-art techniques. We coin our method Nominality score conditioned time series anomaly detection by Point/Sequential Reconstruction (NPSR).