## 1 Introduction

Time series anomaly detection involves identifying unusual patterns or events in a sequence of data collected over time [1]. This technique is crucial in fields such as finance [2], healthcare [3], manufacturing [4], transportation [5], and more [6]. A comprehensive evaluation of different techniques can be found in [7]. Time series anomaly detection using unsupervised learning approaches is favored by recent studies due to the fact that they don't require labeled data and have better detection of unseen anomalies [8], which is also the approach used in this work. Most unsupervised time series anomaly detection methods involve calculating an anomaly score at each time point and then comparing this score to some threshold. For calculating this score, we can categorize different methods into three main groups: Reconstruction-based methods involve reconstructing the original time series data and comparing the reconstructed data with the actual data [9, 10, 11]. Predictionbased methods involve predicting the next value in the time series and comparing it with the actual value [12, 13, 14]. Dissimilarity-based methods measure the distance between the value obtained from the model and the distribution or cluster of the aggregated data [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. There can also be hybrid techniques where multiple methods are applied.

While the classification approaches for the types of anomalies differ in the literature [6, 7], we will focus on two classes: point anomalies and contextual anomalies. Point anomalies refer to individual data points that significantly deviate from the expected behavior of the time series and can be detected by observing the data at a single time point. Contextual anomalies, on the other hand, refer to data points that deviate from the expected behavior of the time series in a specific context or condition. These anomalies cannot be detected by observing the data at a single time point and can only be detected by observing the contextual information. As a result, point anomalies can be detected using any general anomaly detection technique that does not require temporal information. Such models are called point-based models in this work. However, detecting contextual anomalies requires a model that can learn temporal information. Such models require a sequence of input, hence they are termed sequence-based models in this work. A time point may contain both point and contextual anomalies. Obviously, contextual anomalies are harder to detect. An important trade-off arises when a model tries to learn time-dependent relationships for detecting contextual anomalies but loses precision or accuracy in finding point anomalies. This trade-off becomes more significant in high-dimensional data, where modeling the temporal relationship is difficult [21].