Page 2

Transformer, as one of the most advanced neural network models in Natural Language Processing (NLP), exhibits diverse applications in the field of anomaly detection. To inspire research on Transformer-based anomaly detection, this review offers a fresh perspective on the concept of anomaly detection. We explore the current challenges of anomaly detection and provide detailed insights into the operating principles of Transformer and its variants in anomaly detection tasks. Additionally, we delineate various application scenarios for Transformerbased anomaly detection models and discuss the datasets and evaluation metrics employed. Furthermore, this review highlights the key challenges in Transformerbased anomaly detection research and conducts a comprehensive analysis of future research trends in this domain. The review includes an extensive compilation of over 100 core references related to Transformer-based anomaly detection. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive review that focuses on the research related to Transformer in the context of anomaly detection. We hope that this paper can provide detailed technical information to researchers interested in Transformer-based anomaly detection tasks.

Keywords: Transformer, Anomaly detection, Deep learning, Hybrid model

## 1 Introduction

Anomaly detection [1] is the task of identifying anomalous data that are statistically different from normal instances in terms of numerical characteristics. Anomaly detection has a wide range of applications, including but not limited to system logs [2], industrial control systems (ICS) [3], autonomous driving systems [4], medical diagnostics [5], spacecraft [6], etc. There are many factors leading to system failures, such as system errors, human factors, natural disasters, malicious intrusions, etc. The purpose of anomaly detection is to precisely identify system failures and guarantee the stable operation of the system.

According to the timeline, the technical development of anomaly detection has gone through statistical methods, machine learning-based algorithms, neural networks, and deep learning-based methods. Experimental results show that the methods based on neural networks and deep learning can achieve better detection performance than statistical methods and machine learning algorithms due to their outstanding capabilities in learning expressive representations of complex data. (i.e., high-dimensional data, spatial data, etc.) At present, a variety of neural network architectures have been applied to the task of anomaly detection, such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [7], Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [8], Encoder-Decoder structure [9], Transformer [2] and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [10].