Page 10

Although relevant research related to Transformer-based self-supervised anomaly detection is still in its infancy, it is foreseeable that the stronger generalization ability and model robustness make the self-supervised approach one of the high-potential paradigms.

## 3.5 Weak-supervised learning

Weak-supervised learning is a new branch in the field of machine learning. Compared with supervised methods, weak-supervised learning trains model parameters by using limited, noisy, or inaccurately labeled data. According to the degree of data labeling, the weak-supervised learning method can be divided into the following three categories: incomplete supervision, inexact supervision, and inaccurate supervision. Incomplete supervision means that part of the data in the training sample contains labels, while the rest do not have valid labels, similar to semi-supervised learning. Therefore, in a sense, weak-supervised learning and semi-supervised learning are not completely mutually exclusive. Inexact supervision means that the data has only coarse-grained labels. Inexact supervision is most often applied in the image domains, such as the task of only giving information about the presence of a face in an image, but not providing the exact location of the face. For anomaly detection tasks, inexact supervision often means that the coarse-grained information is labeled with anomalies (i.e., giving whether there is an anomaly in the entire time series or the whole image), and the model needs to perform the anomaly detection task of fine-grained information (i.e., determining whether there is an anomaly at a certain time step in the time series data or in a certain pixel position of an image). Inaccurate supervision means that the training samples contain labels but are not accurate. The reason for this phenomenon may be that the data contains noise, human mislabeling, etc.

Li et al. [65] used a Convolutional Transformer-based Multi-Sequence Learning network for video anomaly detection from two different granularities (video-level anomaly probability and fragment-level anomaly score). They used whether the videolevel fine-grained contains anomalies as a label to predict the anomaly score of each frame through a weak supervision paradigm, which is a typical inaccurate supervision approach. Huang et al. [66] proposed a weakly supervised temporal discriminative (WSTD) paradigm to address this problem from another perspective. In addition, Tian et al. [67] used a weak-supervised learning method of Convolutional Transformer to detect the anomalies of polyp frames.

Similar to self-supervised learning, the development of weak-supervised paradigm is also in its infancy. However, existing experimental results [66] demonstrate that weaksupervised approaches can achieve improved anomaly detection performance compared to unsupervised methods while providing easier access to label information compared