Page 77

representation, enhancing feature extraction ability, etc. On the other hand, supervised multi-class classification anomaly detection methods should be gradually transformed into semi-supervised and weak-supervised methods. Since the phenomenon of lackinglabeled data is still prevalent, using semi-supervised or weak-supervised learning can further enhance the universality and generalization ability of the model. At the same time, multi-class classification anomaly detection models should be combined with the MAML method, so that they can still effectively learn the features of various types of anomalies even on labeled datasets with severely limited data volume. Using the data enhancement method to expand the multi-class classification dataset is also another feasible approach. Researchers can learn from the idea of manually generating corrupted image samples in the field of image anomaly detection, and artificially generating different types of anomaly samples to expand the multi-class classification dataset and enhance the stability of model training. Therefore, using the MAMLmethod, manual data expansion, and using semi-supervised & weak-supervised training methods are several important directions for the development of multi-class classification anomaly detection models.

## 7.3.5 Method fusion and hybrid model

It is not difficult to see from the previous summary of scientific research results that the fusion of methods and the use of hybrid models are almost an inevitable trend in the development of anomaly detection. No neural network model can provide perfect, unassailable performance and efficiency for anomaly detection tasks, and so does Transformer. Hybrid models enable Transformer to complement other models for higher performance.

## 7.3.6 Contrastive Learning

Contrastive learning is essentially a self-supervised learning method, which lets models learn the general features by learning the similarities or differences of data points. Contrastive learning can enhance the feature difference between normal and anomalous samples, which is of great significance for anomaly detection in the context of large unlabeled datasets. In addition, contrastive learning can reduce the knowledge cost required for the model to discriminate anomalies by identifying them with only some key features in the hidden space. However, the applications of contrastive learning in the current Transformer-based anomaly detection model are very few. Wang [34], Fan et al. [83] and Zhou et al. [117] introduced contrastive learning in their models. Therefore, for Transformer anomaly detection models using self-supervised methods, the use of contrastive learning is one of the important future research directions.

## 7.3.7 New application scenarios

In Section 5, this paper introduces the application scenarios of the Transformer-based anomaly detection model. Since there is a consensus in the artificial intelligence community that Transformer is a generalized model, we believe that Transformer should be applied in more anomaly detection scenarios in the future, rather than the fields of image, audio, sequence data, etc. This is also supported by the other categories in

the application scenario in Section 5. In the future, we hope that Transformer model can be applied to more global real-time hotspot tasks, such as anomaly identification and trend prediction of pandemic virus.

## 8 Conclusion

In this paper, we present a comprehensive review of anomaly detection methods based on the Transformer architecture. We delve into the theoretical and methodological aspects of utilizing the Transformer in anomaly detection tasks. Moreover, we summarize and analyze a range of methods, considering their applicability to different scenarios and evaluating their performance. Additionally, the paper identifies key research issues, challenges, and outlines future directions for further exploration in this area. We hope that this review will help readers gain a comprehensive understanding of Transformer's research in the field of anomaly detection. Since the research in this area is still in its infancy, we are confident that more innovative techniques and frontier theories based on Transformer will emerge in the future.

## Acknowledgement

The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful suggestions on this work.

## Declarations

- · Funding: This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China Under Grant Nos (2022YFB3103403), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities Under Grant Nos (YCJJ20230464), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China Under Grant Nos (6217071437, 62072200, 62127808).
- · Competing interests: The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this article.
- · Availability of data and materials: No datasets were generated during the current study.
- · Authors' contributions: Mingrui Ma: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Validation, Writing Review & Editing; Lansheng Han: Investigation, Visualization, Resources, Funding acquisition; Chuanjie Zhou: Supervision, Project administration.

## References

- [1] Chandola, V., Banerjee, A., Kumar, V.: Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys 41 (3), 1-58 (2009) https://doi.org/10.1145/1541880. 1541882

- [2] Huang, S., Liu, Y., Fung, C., He, R., Zhao, Y., Yang, H., Luan, Z.: HitAnomaly: Hierarchical Transformers for Anomaly Detection in System Log. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management 17 (4), 2064-2076 (2020) https: //doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2020.3034647
- [3] Zhang, L., Lv, Z., Zhang, X., Chen, C., Li, N., Li, Y., Wang, W.: A Novel Approach for Traffic Anomaly Detection in Power Distributed Control System and Substation System. In: Liu, J.K., Huang, X. (eds.) Network and System Security vol. 11928, pp. 408-417. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-36938-5 24
- [4] Han, X., Chen, K., Zhou, Y., Qiu, M., Fan, C., Liu, Y., Zhang, T.: A Unified Anomaly Detection Methodology for Lane-Following of Autonomous Driving Systems. In: 2021 IEEE Intl Conf on Parallel & Distributed Processing with Applications, Big Data & Cloud Computing, Sustainable Computing & Communications, Social Computing & Networking (ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), pp. 836-844. IEEE, New York City, NY, USA (2021). https: //doi.org/10.1109/ISPA-BDCloud-SocialCom-SustainCom52081.2021.00119
- [5] Pinaya, W.H.L., Tudosiu, P.-D., Gray, R., Rees, G., Nachev, P., Ourselin, S., Cardoso, M.J.: Unsupervised brain anomaly detection and segmentation with transformers. In: Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 143, pp. 596-617. PMLR, Lubeck, Germany (2021). https://proceedings.mlr.press/v143/ pinaya21a.html
- [6] Meng, H., Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Zhao, H.: Spacecraft Anomaly Detection via Transformer Reconstruction Error. In: Jing, Z. (ed.) Proceedings of the International Conference on Aerospace System Science and Engineering 2019 vol. 622, pp. 351-362. Springer Singapore, Singapore (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-981-15-1773-0 28
- [7] Zhang, Y., Zhao, M., Yan, L., Gao, T., Chen, J.: CNN-Based Anomaly Detection For Face Presentation Attack Detection With Multi-Channel Images. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP), pp. 189-192. IEEE, Macau, China (2020). https://doi.org/10. 1109/VCIP49819.2020.9301818
- [8] Luo, W., Liu, W., Gao, S.: A Revisit of Sparse Coding Based Anomaly Detection in Stacked RNN Framework. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 341-349. IEEE, Venice (2017). https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICCV.2017.45
- [9] Nakazawa, T., Kulkarni, D.V.: Anomaly Detection and Segmentation for Wafer Defect Patterns Using Deep Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Neural Network Architectures in Semiconductor Manufacturing. IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing 32 (2), 250-256 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1109/TSM.

## 2019.2897690

- [10] Li, D., Chen, D., Jin, B., Shi, L., Goh, J., Ng, S.-K.: MAD-GAN: Multivariate Anomaly Detection for Time Series Data with Generative Adversarial Networks. In: Tetko, I.V., K˚urkov'a, V., Karpov, P., Theis, F. (eds.) Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning - ICANN 2019: Text and Time Series vol. 11730, pp. 703-716. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30490-4 56
- [11] Oksuz, K., Cam, B.C., Kalkan, S., Akbas, E.: Imbalance Problems in Object Detection: A Review. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 43 (10), 3388-3415 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2020. 2981890
- [12] Lin, S., Clark, R., Birke, R., Schonborn, S., Trigoni, N., Roberts, S.: Anomaly Detection for Time Series Using VAE-LSTM Hybrid Model. In: ICASSP 2020 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 4322-4326. IEEE, Barcelona, Spain (2020). https://doi.org/10. 1109/ICASSP40776.2020.9053558
- [13] Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., Bottou, L.: Wasserstein generative adversarial networks. In: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 70, pp. 214-223. PMLR, Sydney, Australia (2017). http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/arjovsky17a.html
- [14] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L.u., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. In: Guyon, I., Luxburg, U.V., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S., Garnett, R. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., Long Beach, CA, USA (2017). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/ paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
- [15] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: Burstein, J., Doran, C., Solorio, T. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171-4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota (2019). https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423
- [16] Guo, H., Yuan, S., Wu, X.: LogBERT: Log Anomaly Detection via BERT. In: 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 18. IEEE, Shenzhen, China (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021. 9534113
- [17] Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X.,

| Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., Uszkoreit, J., Houlsby, N.: An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recog- nition at scale. In: 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, Virtual Event (2021). https://openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [18] Tuli, S., Casale, G., Jennings, N.R.: Tranad: Deep transformer networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data. Proc. VLDB Endow. 15 (6), 1201-1214 (2022) https://doi.org/10.14778/3514061.3514067                                                                                                                                                          |
| [19] Zeng, F., Chen, M., Qian, C., Wang, Y., Zhou, Y., Tang, W.: Multivariate time series anomaly detection with adversarial transformer architecture in the internet of things. Future Generation Computer Systems 144 , 244-255 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2023.02.015                                                                                             |
| [20] Chandola, V., Banerjee, A., Kumar, V.: Outlier detection: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys 14 , 15 (2007)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [21] Liang, S., Li, Y., Srikant, R.: Enhancing the reliability of out-of-distribution image detection in neural networks. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2018). https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1VGkIxRZ                                                                                                                                              |
| [22] Toth, E., Chawla, S.: Group Deviation Detection Methods: A Survey. ACM Computing Surveys 51 (4), 1-38 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1145/3203246                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| [23] Pimentel, M.A.F., Clifton, D.A., Clifton, L., Tarassenko, L.: A review of nov- elty detection. Signal Processing 99 , 215-249 (2014) https://doi.org/10.1016/j. sigpro.2013.12.026                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| [24] Aggarwal, C.C.: An Introduction to Outlier Analysis, pp. 1-34. Springer Inter- national Publishing, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-47578-3 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| [25] Pang, G., Shen, C., Cao, L., Hengel, A.: Deep learning for anomaly detection: A review. ACM Comput. Surv. 54 (2), 38-13838 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3439950                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| [26] Ma, X., Wu, J., Xue, S., Yang, J., Zhou, C., Sheng, Q.Z., Xiong, H., Akoglu, L.: A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection with deep learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 35 (12), 12012-12038 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2021.3118815                                                                                             |
| [27] Bulusu, S., Kailkhura, B., Li, B., Varshney, P.K., Song, D.: Anomalous example detection in deep learning: A survey. IEEE Access 8 , 132330-132347 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3010274                                                                                                                                                                        |

classification. ACM Comput. Surv. 53 (3), 55-15537 (2021) https://doi.org/10. 1145/3381028

- [29] Miljkovi'c, D.: Review of novelty detection methods. In: The 33rd International Convention MIPRO, pp. 593-598 (2010). IEEE
- [30] Carre˜no, A., Inza, I., Lozano, J.A.: Analyzing rare event, anomaly, novelty and outlier detection terms under the supervised classification framework. Artif. Intell. Rev. 53 (5), 3575-3594 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1007/ S10462-019-09771-Y
- [31] Li, R., Zhou, Z., Liu, X., Li, D., Yang, W., Li, S., Liu, Q.: GTF: An Adaptive Network Anomaly Detection Method at the Network Edge. Security and Communication Networks 2021 , 1-12 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/ 3017797
- [32] Sethi, A., Gupta, S., Agarwal, A., Agrawal, N., Asthana, S.: Autotabtransformer: Hierarchical transformers for self and semi supervised learning in tabular data. In: 2023 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1-8 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN54540.2023.10192021
- [33] Xu, X., Zheng, X.: Hybrid Model for Network Anomaly Detection with Gradient Boosting Decision Trees and Tabtransformer. In: ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 8538-8542. IEEE, Toronto, ON, Canada (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICASSP39728.2021.9414766
- [34] Wang, Q., Zhang, X., Wang, X., Cao, Z.: Log Sequence Anomaly Detection Method Based on Contrastive Adversarial Training and Dual Feature Extraction. Entropy 24 (1), 69 (2021) https://doi.org/10.3390/e24010069
- [35] Le, V.-H., Zhang, H.: Log-based Anomaly Detection Without Log Parsing. In: 2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), pp. 492-504. IEEE, Melbourne, Australia (2021). https: //doi.org/10.1109/ASE51524.2021.9678773
- [36] Fort, S., Ren, J., Lakshminarayanan, B.: Exploring the limits of out-of-distribution detection. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, Virtual, pp. 7068-7081 (2021). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/ 3941c4358616274ac2436eacf67fae05-Abstract.html
- [37] Koner, R., Sinhamahapatra, P., Roscher, K., Gunnemann, S., Tresp, V.: Oodformer: Out-of-distribution detection transformer. In: 32nd British Machine Vision Conference 2021, BMVC 2021, Online, November 22-25, 2021, p. 209. BMVA Press, Virtual (2021). https://www.bmvc2021-virtualconference.com/

## assets/papers/1391.pdf

- [38] Touvron, H., Cord, M., Douze, M., Massa, F., Sablayrolles, A., J'egou, H.: Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10347-10357 (2021). PMLR. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/touvron21a.html
- [39] Yu, K., Tan, L., Mumtaz, S., Al-Rubaye, S., Al-Dulaimi, A., Bashir, A.K., Khan, F.A.: Securing Critical Infrastructures: Deep-Learning-Based Threat Detection in IIoT. IEEE Communications Magazine 59 (10), 76-82 (2021) https://doi.org/ 10.1109/MCOM.101.2001126
- [40] Li, X., Chen, P., Jing, L., He, Z., Yu, G.: SwissLog: Robust and Unified Deep Learning Based Log Anomaly Detection for Diverse Faults. In: 2020 IEEE 31st International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE), pp. 92-103. IEEE, Coimbra, Portugal (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSRE5003. 2020.00018
- [41] Guo, L., Li, R., Jiang, B.: A Data-Driven Long Time-Series Electrical Line Trip Fault Prediction Method Using an Improved Stacked-Informer Network. Sensors 21 (13), 4466 (2021) https://doi.org/10.3390/s21134466
- [42] Zhou, H., Zhang, S., Peng, J., Zhang, S., Li, J., Xiong, H., Zhang, W.: Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting. In: ThirtyFifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021, pp. 11106-11115. AAAI Press, Virtual (2021). https://doi.org/10.1609/AAAI.V35I12.17325
- [43] Manolache, A., Brad, F., Burceanu, E.: DATE: Detecting anomalies in text via self-supervision of transformers. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 267-277. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online (2021). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.25 . https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.25
- [44] Zhao, Z., Niu, W., Zhang, X., Zhang, R., Yu, Z., Huang, C.: Trine: Syslog anomaly detection with three transformer encoders in one generative adversarial network. Applied Intelligence (2021) https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10489-021-02863-9
- [45] Mishra, P., Verk, R., Fornasier, D., Piciarelli, C., Foresti, G.L.: VT-ADL: A Vision Transformer Network for Image Anomaly Detection and Localization. In: 2021 IEEE 30th International Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE), pp. 01-06. IEEE, Kyoto, Japan (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIE45552.2021. 9576231

| [46] Wittkopp, T., Acker, A., Nedelkoski, S., Bogatinovski, J., Scheinert, D., Fan, W., Kao, O.: A2log: Attentive augmented log anomaly detection. In: 55th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, HICSS 2022, Virtual Event / Maui, Hawaii, USA, January 4-7, 2022, pp. 1-10. ScholarSpace, Maui, Hawaii, USA (2022). http://hdl.handle.net/10125/79566   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [47] Xu, J., Wu, H., Wang, J., Long, M.: Anomaly transformer: Time series anomaly detection with association discrepancy. In: The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25- 29, 2022. OpenReview.net, Virtual (2022). https://openreview.net/forum?id= LzQQ89U1qm                                                 |
| [48] Feng, X., Song, D., Chen, Y., Chen, Z., Ni, J., Chen, H.: Convolutional Trans- former based Dual Discriminator Generative Adversarial Networks for Video Anomaly Detection. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Confer- ence on Multimedia, pp. 5546-5554. ACM, Virtual Event China (2021). https: //doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3475693                     |
| [49] Li, Y., Peng, X., Zhang, J., Li, Z., Wen, M.: DCT-GAN: Dilated Convolutional Transformer-based GAN for Time Series Anomaly Detection. IEEE Transac- tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 1-1 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1109/ TKDE.2021.3130234                                                                                                                 |
| [50] Tajiri, K., Iwata, T., Matsuo, Y., Watanabe, K.: Fault detection of ICT systems with deep learning model for missing data. In: 17th IFIP/IEEE Inter- national Symposium on Integrated Network Management, IM 2021, Bordeaux, France, May 17-21, 2021, pp. 445-451. IEEE, Bordeaux, France (2021). https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9463931                    |
| BERT masked language model. Appl. Soft Comput. 146 //doi.org/10.1016/J.ASOC.2023.110689                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| [52] Lee, Y., Kim, J., Kang, P.: Lanobert: System log anomaly detection based on , 110689 (2023) https:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| [53] Zhang, C., Wang, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, H., Han, P.: Log Sequence Anomaly Detection Based on Local Information Extraction and Globally Sparse Trans- former Model. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management 18 (4), 4119-4133 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2021.3125967                                                                           |

- [54] Chen, Z., Chen, D., Zhang, X., Yuan, Z., Cheng, X.: Learning Graph Structures with Transformer for Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection in IoT.

| [55] Wang, X., Pi, D., Zhang, X., Liu, H., Guo, C.: Variational transformer-based anomaly detection approach for multivariate time series. Measurement 191 , 110791 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2022.110791                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [56] Wu, J.-C., Chen, D.-J., Fuh, C.-S., Liu, T.-L.: Learning Unsupervised Metaformer for Anomaly Detection. In: 2021 IEEE/CVF International Confer- ence on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 4349-4358. IEEE, Montreal, QC, Canada (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00433                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| [57] Schneider, P., Rambach, J.R., Mirbach, B., Stricker, D.: Unsupervised anomaly detection from time-of-flight depth images. In: IEEE/CVF Conference on Com- puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, CVPR Workshops 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 19-20, 2022, pp. 230-239. IEEE, New Orleans, LA, USA (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPRW56347.2022.00037                                                                                                                             |
| [58] Xu, K., Ren, T., Zhang, S., Feng, Y., Xiong, C.: Unsupervised out-of-domain detection via pre-trained transformers. In: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet- ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1: Long Papers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021, pp. 1052-1061. Association for Computational Linguistics, Virtual (2021). https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2021. ACL-LONG.85 |
| [59] Chen, L., You, Z., Zhang, N., Xi, J., Le, X.: UTRAD: Anomaly detection and localization with U-Transformer. Neural Networks 147 , 53-62 (2022) https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2021.12.008                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [60] Li, S., Yin, Q., Li, G., Li, Q., Liu, Z., Zhu, J.: Unsupervised contextual anomaly detection for database systems. In: SIGMOD '22: International Conference on Management of Data, Philadelphia, PA, USA, June 12 - 17, 2022, pp. 788-802. ACM, Philadelphia,PA, USA (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3514221.3517861                                                                                                                                                                             |
| [61] Marino, D.L., Wickramasinghe, C.S., Rieger, C., Manic, M.: Self-Supervised and Interpretable Anomaly Detection using Network Transformers. CoRR (2022) arXiv:2202.12997 [cs]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [62] Park, S., Balint, A., Hwang, H.: Self-supervised Medical Out-of-Distribution Using U-Net Vision Transformers. In: Aubreville, M., Zimmerer, D., Heinrich, M. (eds.) Biomedical Image Registration, Domain Generalisation and Out-of- Distribution Analysis vol. 13166, pp. 104-110. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-97281-3 16                                                                                                                 |

- [63] Guo, H., Lin, X., Yang, J., Zhuang, Y., Bai, J., Zheng, T., Zhang, B., Li, Z.: TransLog: A Unified Transformer-based Framework for Log Anomaly Detection.

CoRR (2022) arXiv:2201.00016 [cs]

- [64] Mai, K.T., Davies, T., Griffin, L.D.: Self-Supervised Losses for One-Class Textual Anomaly Detection. CoRR (2022) arXiv:2204.05695 [cs]
- [65] Li, S., Liu, F., Jiao, L.: Self-training multi-sequence learning with transformer for weakly supervised video anomaly detection. In: Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2022, Thirty-Fourth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2022, The Twelveth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2022 Virtual Event, February 22 - March 1, 2022, pp. 1395-1403. AAAI Press, Virtual (2022). https: //doi.org/10.1609/AAAI.V36I2.20028
- [66] Huang, C., Liu, C., Wen, J., Wu, L., Xu, Y., Jiang, Q., Wang, Y.: Weakly supervised video anomaly detection via self-guided temporal discriminative transformer. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 1-14 (2022) https://doi.org/ 10.1109/TCYB.2022.3227044
- [67] Tian, Y., Pang, G., Liu, F., Liu, Y., Wang, C., Chen, Y., Verjans, J., Carneiro, G.: Contrastive transformer-based multiple instance learning for weakly supervised polyp frame detection. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention - MICCAI 2022 - 25th International Conference, Singapore, September 18-22, 2022, Proceedings, Part III. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13433, pp. 88-98. Springer, Singapore (2022). https://doi.org/10. 1007/978-3-031-16437-8 9
- [68] Kozik, R., Pawlicki, M., Chora's, M.: A new method of hybrid time window embedding with transformer-based traffic data classification in IoT-networked environment. Pattern Analysis and Applications 24 (4), 1441-1449 (2021) https: //doi.org/10.1007/s10044-021-00980-2
- [69] Li, Y., Zhang, L., Lv, Z., Wang, W.: Detecting Anomalies in Intelligent Vehicle Charging and Station Power Supply Systems With Multi-Head Attention Models. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 22 (1), 555-564 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2020.3018259
- [70] Falt, M., Forsstrom, S., Zhang, T.: Machine Learning Based Anomaly Detection of Log Files Using Ensemble Learning and Self-Attention. In: 2021 5th International Conference on System Reliability and Safety (ICSRS), pp. 209-215. IEEE, Palermo, Italy (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSRS53853.2021.9660694
- [71] Meng, H., Li, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhao, H.: Spacecraft anomaly detection and relation visualization via masked time series modeling. In: 2019 Prognostics and System Health Management Conference (PHM-Qingdao), pp. 1-7 (2019). https://doi. org/10.1109/PHM-Qingdao46334.2019.8943031
- [72] Zhang, Y., Ning, N., Zhou, P., Wu, B.: UT-ATD: universal transformer

for anomalous trajectory detection by embedding trajectory information. In: The 27th International DMS Conference on Visualization and Visual Languages, DMSVIVA 2021, KSIR Virtual Conference Center, USA, June 29-30, 2021, pp. 70-77. KSI Research Inc., Virtual (2021). https://doi.org/10.18293/ DMSVIVA21-011

- [73] Xiao, T., Quan, Z., Wang, Z.-J., Le, Y., Du, Y., Liao, X., Li, K., Li, K.: Loader: A log anomaly detector based on transformer. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing 16 (5), 3479-3492 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1109/TSC.2023. 3280575
- [74] Zhang, D., Huang, C., Liu, C., Xu, Y.: Weakly supervised video anomaly detection via transformer-enabled temporal relation learning. IEEE Signal Processing Letters 29 , 1197-1201 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1109/LSP.2022.3175092
- [75] Wibisono, S.R., Kistijantoro, A.I.: Log Anomaly Detection Using Adaptive Universal Transformer. In: 2019 International Conference of Advanced Informatics: Concepts, Theory and Applications (ICAICTA), pp. 1-6. IEEE, Yogyakarta, Indonesia (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICAICTA.2019.8904299
- [76] Guo, Y., Wen, Y., Jiang, C., Lian, Y., Wan, Y.: Detecting Log Anomalies with Multi-Head Attention (LAMA). CoRR (2021) arXiv:2101.02392 [cs]
- [77] An adaptive transformer model for anomaly detection in wireless sensor networks in real-time. Measurement: Sensors 25 , 100625 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.measen.2022.100625
- [78] Ding, C., Zhao, J., Sun, S.: Concept drift adaptation for time series anomaly detection via transformer. Neural Processing Letters 55 (3), 2081-2101 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1007/s11063-022-11015-0
- [79] Yu, J., Zheng, Y., Wang, X., Li, W., Wu, Y., Zhao, R., Wu, L.: FastFlow: Unsupervised Anomaly Detection and Localization via 2D Normalizing Flows. CoRR (2021) arXiv:2111.07677
- [80] Wurst, J., Balasubramanian, L., Botsch, M., Utschick, W.: Novelty Detection and Analysis of Traffic Scenario Infrastructures in the Latent Space of a Vision Transformer-Based Triplet Autoencoder. In: 2021 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp. 1304-1311. IEEE, Nagoya, Japan (2021). https: //doi.org/10.1109/IV48863.2021.9575730
- [81] Lee, J., Lee, S., Cho, W., Siddiqui, Z.A., Park, U.: Vision Transformer-Based Tailing Detection in Videos. Applied Sciences 11 (24), 11591 (2021) https://doi. org/10.3390/app112411591
- [82] Tao, X., Adak, C., Chun, P.-J., Yan, S., Liu, H.: Vitalnet: Anomaly on industrial

textured surfaces with hybrid transformer. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 72 , 1-13 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2023. 3250225

- [83] Fan, W., Shangguan, W., Bouguila, N.: Continuous image anomaly detection based on contrastive lifelong learning. Appl. Intell. 53 (14), 17693-17707 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1007/S10489-022-04401-7
- [84] Fan, W., Shangguan, W., Chen, Y.: Transformer-based contrastive learning framework for image anomaly detection. International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 1-14 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1007/s13042-023-01840-7
- [85] Lin, Z., Wang, H., Li, S.: Pavement anomaly detection based on transformer and self-supervised learning. Automation in Construction 143 , 104544 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104544
- [86] De Nardin, A., Mishra, P., Foresti, G.L., Piciarelli, C.: Masked transformer for image anomaly localization. International Journal of Neural Systems 32 (07), 2250030 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1142/S0129065722500307
- [87] Lee, J., Nam, W.-J., Lee, S.-W.: Multi-contextual predictions with vision transformer for video anomaly detection. In: 2022 26th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 1012-1018 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICPR56361.2022.9956507
- [88] Liu, Z., Lin, Y., Cao, Y., Hu, H., Wei, Y., Zhang, Z., Lin, S., Guo, B.: Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In: 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada, October 10-17, 2021, pp. 9992-10002. IEEE, Montreal, QC, Canada (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00986
- [89] Han, X., Zhou, Y., Chen, K., Qiu, H., Qiu, M., Liu, Y., Zhang, T.: ADS-Lead: Lifelong Anomaly Detection in Autonomous Driving Systems. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 1-13 (2022) https://doi.org/10. 1109/TITS.2021.3122906
- [90] Jiang, J., Zhu, J., Bilal, M., Cui, Y., Kumar, N., Dou, R., Su, F., Xu, X.: Masked swin transformer unet for industrial anomaly detection. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 19 (2), 2200-2209 (2023) https://doi.org/10. 1109/TII.2022.3199228
- [91] Doshi, K., Abudalou, S., Yilmaz, Y.: TiSAT: Time Series Anomaly Transformer. arXiv:2203.05167 [cs, eess, stat] (2022) arXiv:2203.05167 [cs, eess, stat]
- [92] Gulati, A., Qin, J., Chiu, C., Parmar, N., Zhang, Y., Yu, J., Han, W., Wang, S., Zhang, Z., Wu, Y., Pang, R.: Conformer: Convolution-augmented transformer for speech recognition. In: Interspeech 2020, 21st Annual Conference of

the International Speech Communication Association, Virtual Event, Shanghai, China, 25-29 October 2020, pp. 5036-5040. ISCA, Shanghai, China (2020). https://doi.org/10.21437/INTERSPEECH.2020-3015

- [93] Stowell, D., Giannoulis, D., Benetos, E., Lagrange, M., Plumbley, M.D.: Detection and Classification of Acoustic Scenes and Events. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 17 (10), 1733-1746 (2015) https://doi.org/10.1109/TMM.2015. 2428998
- [94] Yella, J., Zhang, C., Petrov, S., Huang, Y., Qian, X., Minai, A.A., Bom, S.: SoftSensing ConFormer: A Curriculum Learning-based Convolutional Transformer. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1990-1998. IEEE, Orlando, FL, USA (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData52589.2021. 9671991
- [95] You, Z., Yang, K., Luo, W., Cui, L., Zheng, Y., Le, X.: Adtr: Anomaly detection transformer with feature reconstruction. In: International Conference on Neural Information Processing, pp. 298-310 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-031-30111-7 26 . Springer
- [96] Jin, P., Mou, L., Xia, G.-S., Zhu, X.X.: Anomaly detection in aerial videos with transformers. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 60 , 1-13 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2022.3198130
- [97] Sun, X., Chen, J., Shen, X., Li, H.: Transformer with spatio-temporal representation for video anomaly detection. In: Joint IAPR International Workshops on Statistical Techniques in Pattern Recognition (SPR) and Structural and Syntactic Pattern Recognition (SSPR), pp. 213-222 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-031-23028-8 22 . Springer
- [98] Deshpande, K., Punn, N.S., Sonbhadra, S.K., Agarwal, S.: Anomaly detection in surveillance videos using transformer based attention model. In: International Conference on Neural Information Processing, pp. 199-211 (2022). https://doi. org/10.1007/978-981-99-1648-1 17 . Springer
- [99] Madan, N., Ristea, N.-C., Ionescu, R.T., Nasrollahi, K., Khan, F.S., Moeslund, T.B., Shah, M.: Self-supervised masked convolutional transformer block for anomaly detection. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 46 (1), 525-542 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3322604
- [100] Cai, X., Xiao, R., Zeng, Z., Gong, P., Ni, Y.: Itran: A novel transformer-based approach for industrial anomaly detection and localization. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 125 , 106677 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1016/j. engappai.2023.106677
- [101] Ullah, W., Hussain, T., Ullah, F.U.M., Lee, M.Y., Baik, S.W.: Transcnn: Hybrid cnn and transformer mechanism for surveillance anomaly detection. Engineering

| Applications of Artificial Intelligence 123 , 106173 (2023) https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.engappai.2023.106173                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [102] Kim, J., Kang, H., Kang, P.: Time-series anomaly detection with stacked trans- former representations and 1d convolutional network. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 , 105964 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai. 2023.105964                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| [103] Choromanski, K.M., Likhosherstov, V., Dohan, D., Song, X., Gane, A., Sarl'os, T., Hawkins, P., Davis, J.Q., Mohiuddin, A., Kaiser, L., Belanger, D.B., Colwell, L.J., Weller, A.: Rethinking attention with performers. In: 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, Austria (2021). https://openreview.net/forum? id=Ua6zuk0WRH                                                                                                            |
| [104] Graham, M.S., Tudosiu, P., Wright, P., Pinaya, W.H.L., U.-King-Im, J., Mah, Y.H., Teo, J.T., Jager, H.R., Werring, D., Nachev, P., Ourselin, S., Cardoso, M.J.: Transformer-based out-of-distribution detection for clinically safe segmen- tation. In: International Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, MIDL 2022, 6-8 July 2022, Zurich, Switzerland. Proceedings of Machine Learn- ing Research, vol. 172, pp. 457-476. PMLR, Zurich, Switzerland (2022). https: //proceedings.mlr.press/v172/graham22a.html |
| [106] Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., Stoyanov, V.: RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach. CoRR (2019) arXiv:1907.11692 [cs]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| [107] Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cistac, P., Rault, T., Louf, R., Funtowicz, M., Brew, J.: Huggingface's transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. CoRR abs/1910.03771 (2019)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| trained language model. Applied Artificial Intelligence 36                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| [108] Chen, S., Liao, H.: Bert-log: Anomaly detection for system logs based on pre- (1), 2145642 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1080/08839514.2022.2145642                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| [109] Huang, S., Liu, Y., Fung, C., Wang, H., Yang, H., Luan, Z.: Improving log-based anomaly detection by pre-training hierarchical transformers. IEEE Transac- tions on Computers 72 (9), 2656-2667 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1109/TC.2023. 3257518                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| [110] You, Z., Zhou, Y., Yang, T., Fan, W.: Anomaly-Injected Deep Support Vec- tor Data Description for Text Outlier Detection. arXiv:2110.14729 [cs] (2021)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

| [111] He, P., Zhu, J., Zheng, Z., Lyu, M.R.: Drain: An Online Log Parsing Approach                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| with Fixed Depth Tree. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS), pp. 33-40. IEEE, Honolulu, HI, USA (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICWS.2017.13 [112] Ott, H., Bogatinovski, J., Acker, A., Nedelkoski, S., Kao, O.: Robust and Trans-                                                                                                                                                                              |
| [113] Hirakawa, R., Tominaga, K., Nakatoh, Y.: Software Log Anomaly Detection Through One Class Clustering of Transformer Encoder Representation. In: Stephanidis, C., Antona, M. (eds.) HCI International 2020 - Posters vol. 1224, pp. 655-661. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/ 10.1007/978-3-030-50726-8 85                                                                                            |
| [114] Akiba, T., Sano, S., Yanase, T., Ohta, T., Koyama, M.: Optuna: A next- generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Min- ing, KDD 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA, August 4-8, 2019, pp. 2623-2631. ACM, Anchorage, AK, USA (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330701                                                              |
| [115] Dang, W., Zhou, B., Wei, L., Zhang, W., Yang, Z., Hu, S.: TS-Bert: Time Series Anomaly Detection via Pre-training Model Bert. In: Paszynski, M., Kran- zlmuller, D., Krzhizhanovskaya, V.V., Dongarra, J.J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) Com- putational Science - ICCS 2021 vol. 12743, pp. 209-223. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-77964-1 17                                          |
| [116] Unal, U., Dag, H.: AnomalyAdapters: Parameter-Efficient Multi-Anomaly Task Detection. IEEE Access 10 , 5635-5646 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1109/ ACCESS.2022.3141161                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| [117] Zhou, W., Liu, F., Chen, M.: Contrastive out-of-distribution detection for pretrained transformers. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri- cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November, 2021, pp. 1100-1111. Associ- ation for Computational Linguistics, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic (2021). https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2021.EMNLP-MAIN.84 |
| [118] Hendrycks, D., Liu, X., Wallace, E., Dziedzic, A., Krishnan, R., Song, D.: Pre- trained transformers improve out-of-distribution robustness. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pp. 2744-2751. Association for Computational Linguistics, Virtual (2020). https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2020.ACL-MAIN.244                                 |

| [119] Lan, Z., Chen, M., Goodman, S., Gimpel, K., Sharma, P., Soricut, R.: ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language representations. In: 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (2020). https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1eA7AEtvS                                                                                                                                                                         |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [120] Sanh, V., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., Wolf, T.: DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv:1910.01108 [cs] (2020) arXiv:1910.01108 [cs]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| [121] Podolskiy, A., Lipin, D., Bout, A., Artemova, E., Piontkovskaya, I.: Revisiting mahalanobis distance for transformer-based out-of-domain detection. In: Thirty- Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021, pp. 13675-13682. AAAI Press, Virtual (2021). https://doi.org/10.1609/AAAI.V35I15.17612 |
| [122] Lee, C., Hong, J., Heo, D., Choi, H.: Sequential Deep Learning Architec- tures for Anomaly Detection in Virtual Network Function Chains. In: 2021 International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Con- vergence (ICTC), pp. 1163-1168. IEEE, Jeju Island, Korea, Republic of (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTC52510.2021.9621043                                                                                                                                                                               |
| [123] Pang, W., He, Q., Li, Y.: Predicting skeleton trajectories using a Skeleton- Transformer for video anomaly detection. Multimedia Systems (2022) https: //doi.org/10.1007/s00530-022-00915-9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| [124] Mori, H., Tamura, S., Hayamizu, S.: Anomalous Sound Detection Based On Attention Mechanism. In: 2021 29th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), pp. 581-585. IEEE, Dublin, Ireland (2021). https://doi.org/10. 23919/EUSIPCO54536.2021.9616201                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| [125] Liu, Y., Pan, S., Wang, Y.G., Xiong, F., Wang, L., Chen, Q., Lee, V.C.: Anomaly Detection in Dynamic Graphs via Transformer. IEEE Transactions on Knowl- edge and Data Engineering, 1-1 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2021. 3124061                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| [126] Liu, L., Tsai, W., Bhuiyan, M.Z.A., Peng, H., Liu, M.: Blockchain-enabled fraud discovery through abnormal smart contract detection on ethereum. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 128 , 158-166 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1016/J. FUTURE.2021.08.023                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| [127] Pirnay, J., Chai, K.: Inpainting transformer for anomaly detection. In: Image Analysis and Processing - ICIAP 2022 - 21st International Conference, Lecce, Italy, May 23-27, 2022, Proceedings, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13232, pp. 394-406. Springer, Lecce, Italy (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

## 978-3-031-06430-2 33

- [128] Li, M., Han, D., Li, D., Liu, H., Chang, C.-C.: MFVT:An Anomaly Traffic Detection Method Merging Feature Fusion Network and Vision Transformer Architecture. Preprint, In Review (September 2021). https://doi.org/10.21203/ rs.3.rs-877144/v1
- [129] Zhang, Y., Gong, Y., Zhu, H., Bai, X., Tang, W.: Multi-head enhanced selfattention network for novelty detection. Pattern Recognition 107 , 107486 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2020.107486
- [130] Gundawar, S., Kumar, N., Yash, P., Singh, A.K., Deepan, M., Subramani, R., Uma, B.R., Krishnapriya, G., Shivaprakash, B., Venkataramana, D.: Multihead Self-attention and LSTM for Spacecraft Telemetry Anomaly Detection. In: Garg, D., Jagannathan, S., Gupta, A., Garg, L., Gupta, S. (eds.) Advanced Computing vol. 1528, pp. 463-479. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2022). https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-95502-1 35
- [131] Kazemi, S.M., Goel, R., Eghbali, S., Ramanan, J., Sahota, J., Thakur, S., Wu, S., Smyth, C., Poupart, P., Brubaker, M.: Time2Vec: Learning a Vector Representation of Time. arXiv:1907.05321 [cs] (2019) arXiv:1907.05321 [cs]
- [132] Nedelkoski, S., Bogatinovski, J., Acker, A., Cardoso, J., Kao, O.: Self-Attentive Classification-Based Anomaly Detection in Unstructured Logs. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 1196-1201. IEEE, Sorrento, Italy (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDM50108.2020.00148
- [133] Pereira, J., Silveira, M.: Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in Energy Time Series Data Using Variational Recurrent Autoencoders with Attention. In: 2018 17th IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 1275-1282. IEEE, Orlando, FL (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICMLA.2018.00207
- [134] Yuan, H., Cai, Z., Zhou, H., Wang, Y., Chen, X.: TransAnomaly: Video Anomaly Detection Using Video Vision Transformer. IEEE Access 9 , 123977-123986 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3109102
- [135] Zhang, H., Xia, Y., Yan, T., Liu, G.: Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series through Transformer-based Variational Autoencoder. In: 2021 33rd Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC), pp. 281286. IEEE, Kunming, China (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/CCDC52312.2021. 9601669
- [136] Wang, Z., Zhang, Y., Luo, L., Wang, N.: Anodfdnet: A deep feature difference network for anomaly detection. J. Sensors 2022 , 1-14 (2022) https://doi.org/ 10.1155/2022/3538541

| [137] Chen, N., Tu, H., Duan, X., Hu, L., Guo, C.: Semisupervised anomaly detection of multivariate time series based on a variational autoencoder. Applied Intelli- gence 53 (5), 6074-6098 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-022-03829-1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [138] Tian, Y., Pang, G., Liu, Y., Wang, C., Chen, Y., Liu, F., Singh, R., Verjans, J.W., Wang, M., Carneiro, G.: Unsupervised anomaly detection in medical images with a memory-augmented multi-level cross-attentional masked autoencoder. In: Machine Learning in Medical Imaging - 14th International Workshop, MLMI 2023, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2023, Vancouver, BC, Canada, October 8, 2023, Proceedings, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 14349, pp. 11-21. Springer, Vancouver, BC, Canada (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-031-45676-3 2 |
| [139] He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Doll'ar, P., Girshick, R.B.: Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In: IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022, pp. 15979-15988. IEEE, New Orleans, LA, USA (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/ CVPR52688.2022.01553                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| [140] Ma, S., Nie, J., Kang, J., Lyu, L., Liu, R.W., Zhao, R., Liu, Z., Niyato, D.: Privacy-preserving anomaly detection in cloud manufacturing via feder- ated transformer. IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics 18 (12), 8977-8987 (2022) https: //doi.org/10.1109/TII.2022.3167478                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [141] Ma, M., Han, L., Zhou, C.: Btad: A binary transformer deep neural net- work model for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data. Advanced Engineering Informatics 56 , 101949 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2023. 101949                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| [142] Lakha, B., Mount, S.L., Serra, E., Cuzzocrea, A.: Anomaly detection in cyber- security events through graph neural network and transformer based model: A case study with beth dataset. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 5756-5764 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData55660. 2022.10020336                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| [143] Kong, L., Yu, J., Tang, D., Song, Y., Han, D.: Multivariate time series anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks based on active distortion trans- former. IEEE Sensors Journal 23 (9), 9658-9668 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1109/ JSEN.2023.3260563                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| [144] Raza, A., Tran, K.P., Koehl, L., Li, S.: Anofed: Adaptive anomaly detection for digital health using transformer-based federated learning and support vector data description. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 121 , 106051 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2023.106051                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| [145] Li, Y., Song, X., Xu, T., Feng, Z.: Memory-token transformer for unsuper- vised video anomaly detection. In: 2022 26th International Conference on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 3325-3332 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICPR56361.2022.9956318

- [146] Qin, S., Zhu, J., Wang, D., Ou, L., Gui, H., Tao, G.: Decomposed transformer with frequency attention for multivariate time series anomaly detection. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1090-1098 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData55660.2022.10021063
- [147] Yao, H., Luo, W., Yu, W., Zhang, X., Qiang, Z., Luo, D., Shi, H.: Dualattention transformer and discriminative flow for industrial visual anomaly detection. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 1-15 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2023.3322156
- [148] Xie, X., Huang, Y., Ning, W., Wu, D., Li, Z., Yang, H.: Rdad: A reconstructive and discriminative anomaly detection model based on transformer. International Journal of Intelligent Systems 37 (11), 8928-8946 (2022) https: //doi.org/10.1002/int.22974
- [149] Yang, C., Lan, S., Huang, W., Wang, W., Liu, G., Yang, H., Ma, W., Li, P.: A transformer-based gan for anomaly detection. In: International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 345-357 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-031-15931-2 29 . Springer
- [150] Xiao, S., Zhang, T., Xu, Z., Qu, J., Hou, S., Dong, W.: Anomaly detection of hyperspectral images based on transformer with spatial-spectral dual-window mask. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 16 , 1414-1426 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2022. 3232762
- [151] Liu, T., Zhang, C., Lam, K.-M., Kong, J.: Decouple and resolve: Transformerbased models for online anomaly detection from weakly labeled videos. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 18 , 15-28 (2023) https: //doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2022.3216479
- [152] Chen, Y., Liu, Z., Zhang, B., Fok, W., Qi, X., Wu, Y.-C.: Mgfn: Magnitudecontrastive glance-and-focus network for weakly-supervised video anomaly detection. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, pp. 387-395 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i1.25112
- [153] Lobo, J.M., Jim'enez-Valverde, A., Real, R.: Auc: a misleading measure of the performance of predictive distribution models. Global ecology and Biogeography 17 (2), 145-151 (2008) https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-8238.2007.00358.x
- [154] Qin, Z.-C.: Roc analysis for predictions made by probabilistic classifiers. In: 2005 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics, vol. 5, pp. 3119-31245 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLC.2005.1527478

| [155] Bergmann, P., Fauser, M., Sattlegger, D., Steger, C.: Mvtec AD - A comprehen- sive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2019, Long Beach, CA, USA, June 16-20, 2019, pp. 9592-9600. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, Long Beach, CA, USA (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2019.00982                                                                       |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [156] Sheikh, H.R., Bovik, A.C.: Image information and visual quality. IEEE Transac- tions on Image Processing 15 (2), 430-444 (2006) https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP. 2005.859378                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| [157] Bozorgtabar, B., Mahapatra, D.: Attention-conditioned augmentations for self- supervised anomaly detection and localization. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, pp. 14720-14728 (2023). https: //doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i12.26720                                                                                                                                                                             |
| [158] Zoph, B., Ghiasi, G., Lin, T., Cui, Y., Liu, H., Cubuk, E.D., Le, Q.: Rethinking pre-training and self-training. In: Advances in Neu- ral Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neu- ral Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6- 12, 2020, Virtual (2020). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/                                                                                                     |
| [159] You, Z., Cui, L., Shen, Y., Yang, K., Lu, X., Zheng, Y., Le, X.: A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection. In: Koyejo, S., Mohamed, S., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D., Cho, K., Oh, A. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Pro- cessing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 4571-4584. Curran Associates, Inc., New Orleans, LA, USA (2022). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2022/file/ 1d774c112926348c3e25ea47d87c835b-Paper-Conference.pdf |
| [160] Siffer, A., Fouque, P., Termier, A., Largouet, C.: Anomaly detection in streams with extreme value theory. In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD Inter- national Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Halifax, NS, Canada, August 13 - 17, 2017, pp. 1067-1075. ACM, Halifax, NS, Canada (2017). https://doi.org/10.1145/3097983.3098144                                                                                                 |
| [161] Ullah, W., Hussain, T., Baik, S.W.: Vision transformer attention with multi- reservoir echo state network for anomaly recognition. Information Processing & Management 60 (3), 103289 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2023.103289                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| [162] Beltagy, I., Peters, M.E., Cohan, A.: Longformer: The long-document trans- former. CoRR (2020) arXiv:2004.05150 [cs]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

- [164] Pillai, G.V., Verma, A., Sen, D.: Transformer based self-context aware prediction for few-shot anomaly detection in videos. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 3485-3489 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICIP46576.2022.9897615
- [165] Bhuyan, M.H., Bhattacharyya, D.K., Kalita, J.K.: Survey on incremental approaches for network anomaly detection. Int. J. Commun. Networks Inf. Secur. 3 (3) (2011)