Page 50

(Note: The concept of anomaly detection here includes the concept category involved in the definition of anomaly detection discussed above, which belongs to anomaly detection in a broad sense.)

As can be seen from Table 2, since Transformer was initially applied to NLP tasks, a significant proportion of related research is carried out on unstructured text tasks such as logs, where Transformer has inherent performance advantages in this

field. Transformer itself is not designed for audio modeling, so few relevant studies apply Transformer to audio anomaly detection tasks. These studies themselves do not directly use Transformer structure to model audio data but rather transform the audio into other forms of data representation [124]. Due to the birth of ViT, a large number of studies have applied ViT to image anomaly detection tasks. Video anomaly detection is more difficult than image anomaly detection because video anomaly detection requires capturing not only the spatial feature information of each frame in the video but also the temporal feature information between different frames. Long and shortterm dependencies are also a focal point of research in image/video anomaly detection. Therefore, Transformer often needs to be combined with other neural network models to better perform video anomaly detection tasks, and related research has only begun to show rapid development since 2022. However, the introduction of generalized frameworks based on hybrid models like SSMCTB [99] have gradually revealed the capability for multimodal anomaly detection. (Which can be simultaneously applied to multiple downstream tasks such as image and video anomaly detection.) Time series data anomaly detection is also an important application scenario of Transformer, because Transformer can effectively model contextual information from a global perspective. Flow data anomaly detection task is similar to time series data anomaly detection task because flow can also be regarded as serialized information in essence. Transformer is also well qualified for the task of feature extraction and traffic modeling under its MHA. Numerous researchers have undertaken initial explorations in utilizing Transformer for anomaly detection tasks across various fields (e.g. the 7 th category of application scenarios). The endeavors have yielded promising outcomes, further highlighting the immense potential of Transformer in diverse anomaly detection tasks.

## 6 Evaluation indexes and datasets of relevant research results

## 6.1 Evaluation indexes