Page 75

Therefore, there are few studies combining Transformer with ZSL methods. Wang et al. [36] have tested the performance of Transformer in ZSL tasks and Few-Shot Learning (FSL) tasks. Pillai et al. [164] investigated the use of Transformer in the task of video anomaly detection under few-shot learning conditions, considering the first few consecutive non-anomalous frames of the video. They utilized features extracted from the frames to train the Transformer in predicting the non-anomalous features of the subsequent frame. Consequently, this paper predicts that in the future, Transformer will increasingly leverage ZSL method to enhance its representation and model generalization capabilities.

## 7.3.2 Explainable learning

The target of explainable learning is to make the training process and experimental results of neural networks logically explainable. This problem not only exists in Transformer but also in GAN, GNN, and other neural networks. For example, hyperparameter selection, nonlinear activation function selection, and threshold selection for anomaly detection in neural networks should be explainable to support human experts' decision-making and reasoning. Zhang et al. [129] used an explainable method in their paper to select the optimal threshold for anomaly detection. Marino et al. [61] showed their desire to explore existing explainable algorithms (such as LIME and SHAP) to provide explanations at the packet level and byte level. Explainability enables us to understand the meaning of the representations that the model learns from the samples and to control the learning process more purposefully. Explainability also detects and eliminates edge cases. However, current researchers do not pay much attention to the explainability of Transformer, so it is one of the key issues in this field to propose more interpretable models for anomaly detection.

## 7.3.3 Life-long learning

In some anomaly detection domains, life-long learning is necessary, such as anomaly detection in the ADS field, because the traffic information on urban roads is always in a real-time change and never-ending state, which requires models with life-long learning capabilities to continuously improve the reliability of anomaly detection. In addition, life-long learning also has the following advantages: it enables the model to retain the detection capability for the original task while adjusting and expanding the model for more complex tasks, improving old knowledge, and storing new knowledge for future use. Han et al. [89] introduced life-long learning in their proposed ADS anomaly detection system to continuously collect data and improve the model in real time. Li et al. [60] aimed to utilize lifelong learning to tackle the issue of false alarms generated by fine-tuned models when encountering forgotten normal patterns. In the future, the development trend of life-long learning should aim to eliminate the need for retraining the model with additional training samples. Instead, the focus should be on incremental learning, where the representation learning of new samples is considered. Ensuring effective life-long learning in the presence of unknown datasets becomes one of the crucial research directions in this field [165].