Page 68

This is because a general log parsing method can convert log datasets from different sources and types into a uniform format that can be easily processed by neural network models, but parsing errors of general log parsers are inevitable. Self-proposed log preprocessing/parsing methods often achieve better performance than the general log parsing method on specific test datasets, but the generality of the model is not guaranteed. For self-designed log parsing methods, researchers need to consider the universality and generalization ability of the method, rather than just obtain excellent performance in several experimental environments mentioned in the paper.

## 7.1.3 Reconstruction-based VS prediction-based, embedding-based method, etc.

Several papers mentioned the classification of anomaly detection methods. Pirnay et al. [127], Wu et al. [56] divided the methods of image anomaly detection into reconstruction-based and embedding-based methods. Chen et al. [59] classified image anomaly detection into reconstruction-based methods and pre-training feature-based methods. Chen et al. [54], and Yuan et al. [134] classified deep learning methods for MTS data anomaly detection and video anomaly detection into reconstruction-based methods and prediction-based methods, respectively. As seen from the above classification, the specific classification methods vary due to different anomaly detection tasks. But generally speaking, most researchers agree to classify anomaly detection methods into mainstream methods based on reconstruction, embedding, or prediction. There is no significant performance difference between these methods because the specific performance depends on the details of the model's internal implementation, parameter selection, training & fine-tuning methods, etc. The classification of these methods is only different in a broad sense. However, these methods also have their limitations. For example, reconstruction-based methods tend to recover both normal and anomalous samples well, making it difficult to detect outliers. To address the issue of the identical shortcut in reconstruction-based methods, You et al. [159] proposed a unified model for multi-class anomaly detection. Firstly, they introduced a layer-wise query decoder to help model the multi-class distribution. Secondly, they employed the neighbor masked attention module to further avoid the information leak from the input feature to the reconstructed output feature. Thirdly, they proposed a feature jittering strategy that urges the model to recover the correct message even with noisy inputs.

## 7.1.4 Distance measurement: Mahalanobis distance VS CE, Cos distance and other loss functions

Recently, many researchers began to apply Mahalanobis distance to the task of anomaly detection. They used Mahalanobis distance instead of traditional distance measurement methods such as CE and Euclidean distance and agreed that Mahalanobis distance can obtain more accurate distance measurement than traditional distance measurement methods, thus improving the accuracy of anomaly detection. Zhou et al. [117] separately compared Mahalanobis distance with distance measures such as Maximum Softmax Probability ( MSP ), Cos , etc. in the experiment part, and the results showed that Mahalanobis distance has a performance advantage in