Page 4

## 2 Concepts of anomaly detection

Anomaly detection is a relatively broad concept. Many studies have proposed very similar concepts, such as outliers [20], out of distributions (OOD) [21], bias [22], and novelty [23]. Although the concepts are different, we can divide them into 3 categories as a whole: anomaly, outliers/OOD, and novelty. In general, anomalies are considered objects (behaviors, patterns, distributions, cases, etc.) that are inconsistent with the data in the normal range of human cognition (normal instances, normal distributions, normal states, characteristics of most objects, etc.) [1, 24, 25]. Anomalies can be biased from the majority of observations, behaviors that do not conform to a clear definition, etc. Currently, many scholars have tried to give different classifications

for anomaly detection, but the corresponding classification methods vary due to the actual needs and application scenarios. For example, Ma et al. [26] believed that social spammers, misinformation, fraudsters, network intruders, etc. all fall into the category of anomalies. Bulusu et al. [27] further divided anomalies into intentional anomalies and unintentional anomalies. However, this division is based on the following conditions:

- 1. Normal samples have the same feature distribution in the latent space;
- 2. The distribution of anomalous samples is very different from that of normal samples.

In fact, different scientific scholars have contradictory definitions of anomalies. Boukerche et al. [28] first identified and proposed the subtle differences in the concepts of outliers and anomalies, but they still used the two concepts confusingly in their paper. In addition, different researchers disagree greatly about whether novelty belongs to the category of anomalies. Miljkovic et al. [29] argued that novelty belongs to the category of anomaly because novelty belongs to the data of the corresponding region in the feature space. While Chandola et al. [1] suggested that novelty does not belong to anomalies. The fact remains, however, that there is a large number of research methods used for novelty detection that can also be applied to the task of anomaly detection. Ander et al. [30] emphasized the differences between related concepts, including anomalies, novelty, outlier, and rare event detection terms. They indicated that these related concepts can be applied to the task of supervised learning. However, they did not further explain whether these related concepts can be extended to other application scenarios such as unsupervised learning. In Table 1, we summarize the definitions of anomalies in different literature. In summary, there is no general, formalized, and rigorous definition of anomaly in the field of anomaly detection, and researchers have not reached a consensus on the concept of anomaly detection.