Page 10

FactoryAssistants . FactoryAssistants advise workers on troubleshooting production line issues in two manufacturing domains: detergent production and textile production [26]. The assistants leverage domain knowledge from FAQs and documented problem cases to answer user queries. The required domain knowledge is provided as a part of the prompt.

SgpTod . SgpTod employs an LLM to implement a chatbot, specifically, a task-oriented dialogue (TOD) system [71]. TOD systems are also known as conversational assistants. In contrast to open-domain dialogue (ODD) systems, which engage users in goalless conversations, they are designed for assisting users in specific tasks.

In general, TOD systems require the following components [3]: Natural Language Understanding (NLU), analyzing the user's input to classify intents and extract entities; Dialogue Management (DM) for

deciding on a system action that is appropriate in a given dialogue state (e.g., ask for more information or invoke a hotel booking service); and Natural Language Generation (NLG) for producing a response that the TOD system can present to the user. Intent classification, also known as intent detection, matches free-text user input to one of several tasks a TOD system can perform (e.g., book a hotel). Entity extraction isolates situational values, called entities, from the user input (e.g., the town and the date of the hotel booking). The TOD system may require several dialogue turns to elicit all necessary entities from the user. In TOD research, the system's internal representation of the user's intentions and the entity values is commonly referred to as its 'belief state'. For example, in the restaurant search domain, the belief state may include attribute-value pairs like cuisine:Indian and pricerange:medium.

SgpTod is a multi-domain TOD system, concurrently handling multiple task domains found in standard TOD evaluation datasets, such as recommending restaurants or finding taxis. Similar to other experimental TOD systems [23], SgpTod accesses a database that stores information from the task domains, such as available hotels and restaurants.

SgpTod comprises two LLM components, called DstPrompter and PolicyPrompter , that are both invoked in every dialogue turn between SgpTod and the user. The DstPrompter handles the NLU aspect, analyzing the user's input and populating the system's belief state. It outputs is an SQL query suited to extract the database entries that match the current belief state. Upon retrieving the database entries, SgpTod invokes its PolicyPrompter which covers both DM and NLG. Prompted with the dialogue history and the database entries retrieved, it produces a two-part output: a natural language response for NLG and a system action for DM.

TruckPlatoon . The concept of truck platooning means that trucks travel closely together for better fuel efficiency and traffic flow. TruckPlatoon comprises an algorithmic control loop which autonomously maintains a consistent distance between trucks. It invokes an LLM to generate naturallanguage reports on the platoon's performance and

stability from measurements tracked by the control algorithm, providing easily understandable information for engineers involved in monitoring and optimizing the truck platooning system.

ExcelCopilot . ExcelCopilot is an example of a recent trend where software companies integrate LLM-based assistants, often termed 'copilots', into their products [44]. These copilots not only provide textual guidance but also perform actions within the software environment, constituting a distinctive type of LLM-integrated application. We chose ExcelCopilot as an example for evaluating our taxonomy. Since its implementation is undisclosed, we infer its architecture from indirect sources, including a screencast and a report on insights and experiences from copilot developers [16, 44]. This inferred architecture may deviate from the actual implementation.