Page 22

Figure 2 displays the number of occurrences of characteristics within the example instances. It must be noted, however, that these do not reflect actual frequencies, as similar LLM components within the same application are aggregated together, indicated by symbols ∗ and 2 in figure 1. Furthermore, ExcelCopilot likely includes occurrences of Prompt Check and Output Revision which are not counted due to insufficient system documentation.

We evaluate the taxonomy against commonly accepted quality criteria: comprehensiveness, robustness, conciseness, mutual exclusiveness, explanatory power, and extensibility [58, 42]. The taxonomy encompasses all example instances including those that were not considered during its development. This demonstrates comprehensiveness . As figure 1 shows, all example instances have unique categorizations, supporting the taxonomy's robustness . This not only indicates that the dimensions and characteristics are distinctive for the domain, but also highlights the wide variety possible in this field. Conciseness demands that the taxonomy uses the minimum number of dimensions and characteristics. The taxonomy gains conciseness by identifying relatively few and abstract characteristics within each dimension. However, it does not adhere to the related subcriterion that each characteristic must be present in at least one investigated instance [54]. Unoccupied characteristics are retained for dimensions whose characteristics were derived conceptually, specifically, for

the Prompt dimensions, the Output Revision dimension, and the Data Function dimension, enhancing the taxonomy's ability to illustrate design options and inspire novel uses for LLM integrations in applications. Some dimensions are constructed in parallel, sharing common sets of characteristics. While this affects conciseness, it makes the taxonomy easier to understand and apply. As is often seen in taxonomy development [54], we deliberately waived the requirement for mutual exclusiveness for some dimensions, specifically the Output Format and Skills dimensions. In the context of this taxonomy, these can equivalently be understood as a set of of six and four binary dimensions respectively, each divided into characteristics 'yes' and 'no'. However, framing them as a single dimension with non-mutually exclusive characteristics seems more intuitive.

Metadimensions structure the taxonomy, and most of the characteristics are illustrated through examples. These measures are recognized for enhancing the explanatory power of a taxonomy [58]. The taxonomy's flat structure allows for the easy addition of dimensions and characteristics, indicating that its extensibility is good. Potential extensions and further aspects of the taxonomy, including its usefulness and ease of use, are discussed in section 6.

We visualize the taxonomy (or, strictly speaking, categorized instances) in a compact form using feature vectors with characteristics abbreviated to singleletter codes. This approach has a drawback, as it requires referencing a legend. Additionally, nonapplicable characteristics in mutually exclusive dimensions are not visible, which means the design space is not completely shown. However, the compactness of the representation allows LLM components within a common application to be grouped closely, so that an LLM-integrated application can be perceived as a unit without appearing convoluted. This is a significant advantage for our purposes.

## 6. Discussion

The discussion first focuses on the taxonomy's applicability and ease of use before considering its overall usefulness.

Figure 2: Occurrences of characteristics in the sample set of LLM-integrated applications.

<!-- image -->