Page 16

Read : The LLM is applied for reading from persistent data store. E.g., SgpTod DstPrompter generates SQL queries which the application executes; Honeycomb QueryAssistant devises analytical database queries.

Write and Both : No LLM component among the samples generates database queries for creating or updating persistent data.

## 5.2.3. Prompt-related dimensions

Integrating an LLM into an application poses specific requirements for prompts, such as the need for prompts to reliably elicit output in the requested

form [68]. While a broad range of prompt patterns have been identified and investigated [66], there is still a lack of research on successful prompt patterns specifically for LLM-integrated applications, on which this taxonomy could build. Developing prompt taxonomies is a challenging research endeavor in itself [49] and is beyond the scope of this research. Therefore, the taxonomy does not define a dimension with specific prompt patterns as characteristics, but rather focuses on how the application generates the prompt for an LLM component from a technical perspective.

Prompts generally consist of several parts with distinct purposes, generated by different mechanisms. Although many authors explore the concepts, a common terminology has yet to be established. This is illustrated in table 3, showing terms from an ad-hoc selection of recent papers addressing prompt generation in applications. In the table, italics indicate that the authors refrain from introducing an abstract term and instead use a domain-specific description. The term 'examples' indicates a one-shot or few-shot prompt pattern. The terms that are adopted for the taxonomy are underlined.

The taxonomy distinguishes three prompt parts referred to as Prompt Instruction , Prompt State , and Prompt Task . These parts can occur in any order, potentially interleaved, and some parts may be absent.

- · Instruction is the part of a prompt that outlines how to solve the task. Defined during LLM component development, it remains static throughout an application's lifespan.
- · State is the situation-dependent part of the prompt that is created dynamically every time the LLM is invoked. The taxonomy opts for the term State instead of 'context' in order to avoid confusion with the 'LLM context' as explained in section 2. The State may include the current dialogue history, an extract of a knowledge base needed specifically for the current LLM invocation, or a state or scene description, etc.
- · Task is the part of the prompt conveying the task to solve in a specific invocation.

Prompt Instruction , State and Task describe the origins of the prompt parts by uniform characteristics: none : The prompt part is not present. E.g., ProgPrompt ActionPlanning has no State prompt, nor does LowCode Planning (except the dialogue history when planning a subprocess). Instruction and Task prompt parts are present in all sample in-