Page 24

thermore, developers of commercial LLM-based applications are beginning to communicate their efforts and challenges [44, 7]. The taxonomy has been applied to example instances from these and additional areas. This demonstrates its potential as a common, unified framework for describing LLM-integrated applications, facilitating the comparison and sharing of development knowledge between researchers and practitioners across various domains.

When applying the taxonomy to the example instances, it proved to be effective and useful as an analytical lens. Descriptions of LLM-integrated applications commonly explain background information and details of the application domain in addition to its LLM integration. When used as an analytical lens, the taxonomy quickly directs the analysis towards the aspects of LLM integration, abstracting from the specificities of the domain.

The taxonomy describes how LLM capabilities can be leveraged in software systems, offers inspiration for LLM-based functions, and outlines options for their implementation as follows. The Skills dimension outlines the range of capabilities an LLM can contribute to an application through a concise set of characteristics, while the Function dimension suggests potential uses, further supported by the Interaction dimension. The Output Type dimension indicates options for encoding the output of an LLM in formats beyond plain text, making it processable by software. The Output Consumer dimension illustrates the diverse ways to utilize or act upon LLM output. Thus, the taxonomy, as intended, spans a design space for LLM integrations.

The sampled LLM-integrated applications showcase the creativity of researchers and developers in applying and exploiting the potentials of LLMs, ranging from straightforward solutions (e.g., TruckPlatoon ) to highly sophisticated and technically complex ones (e.g., AutoDroid ). When using the taxonomy to inspire innovative uses of LLMs, we recommend supplementing it with descriptions of example applications to enhance its illustrativeness. The characteristics of the Skills dimension are derived pragmatically from the investigated example instances. While they do not claim to be exhaustive or deeply

rooted in LLM theory or cognitive science, they add relevant details to the categorizations and illustrate design options and potentials for using LLMs as software components.

It emerged as a key insight of this research that, rather than analyzing an LLM-integrated application in whole, analysis should start with the identification and description of its distinct LLM components. This is essential for gaining a clear understanding of how the application utilizes the capabilities of LLMs. The LLM-integrated application then manifests as a combination of its LLM components. As shown in figure 1, the visualization effectively displays both the quantity and the variety of LLM components in an LLM-integrated application.

LLM components interact through prompt chaining, where one LLM component's output feeds into another's input [67]. When an LLM-integrated application involves such an interaction, the taxonomy represents it as an LLM characteristic within a Prompt dimension. The taxonomy can capture the variance in these interactions. For instance, in AutoDroid TaskExecutor and LowCode Executing , the LLM characteristic appears in the Prompt State dimension, because their prompt components (knowledge base excerpts and prompt definition, respectively) are generated by other LLM components in a preparatory stage. In contrast, the LLM characteristic appears in the Prompt Task dimension for MatrixProduction Operator , because its prompt part is generated individually by the MatrixProduction Manager almost immediately before use.

Taxonomy dimensions that cover entire LLMintegrated applications may be useful. Given their complexity, these dimensions should be designed based on a broader range of examples, which will only become available as more LLM-integrated applications are developed and their architectures disclosed in the future. Extensions to the taxonomy could also include dimensions for describing the structure of prompts in more detail, as well as dimensions addressing characteristics of the language models used.

Table 4: LLM usage in the sample instances. 'Evals' indicates evaluations of various LLMs.